When developer Ginger Hitzke first proposed an affordable housing complex on a parking lot in Solana Beach, she envisioned building 18 new homes for low-income families and adults at a cost of $414,000 per apartment.

More than a decade later, her project has shrunk in size by nearly half and become more than twice as expensive.

At $1.1 million per apartment, the Pearl is the priciest affordable housing project in the state and, likely, the country. It also serves as an alarming example of how political, economic and bureaucratic forces have converged to drive up the cost of such housing at a time when growing numbers of Californians need it.

“I have sticker shock,” Hitzke said. “It’s insane.”

California leads the nation in the cost of building government-subsidized apartment complexes for low-income residents. A Times analysis of state data found that apartments cost an average of about $500,000. In the last decade, the price tag has grown 26%, after adjusting for inflation.

It’s not just the notoriously high price of land or the rising cost of construction materials that explain why it’s so expensive to build affordable housing in California, The Times found. Numerous factors under state and local government control also are to blame, including opposition from neighbors and rules that compel developers to meet labor and environmental standards that often exceed what’s required for luxury condominiums.

All this has complicated California’s efforts to alleviate its homelessness and affordable housing crises, driven by a shortage of 1.3 million homes for low-income households, sky-high rental prices and a poverty rate to match.

And with the coronavirus pandemic already leading to significant job losses, particularly in the low-wage hospitality and service industries, experts believe the demand for affordable housing is only going to grow.

The damage to the economy is likely to severely depress government tax revenue as well, leaving less money available to finance new construction and increasing the need to overhaul how low-income housing gets built in California, said Carolina Reid, faculty research advisor at UC Berkeley’s Terner Center for Housing Innovation and author of a new study on the cost to build low-income housing.

“If you look at how we build affordable housing, every single one of the actors in it, from cities to developers to construction workers, is going to face stress from the coronavirus for years,” Reid said. “This public health crisis adds more urgency to making the reforms we had already needed.”